# Introduction

Medaka is a declarative functional language designed to be practical
for everyday use. Inspired by strong functional languages that have come before it, Medaka
seeks to offer a sleek, simplified, modern take on functional programming.
Medaka offers the following language features:

- Strong static typing based on the Hindley–Milner type system (similar to Haskell and OCaml).
- Haskell-inspired declarative syntax that makes writing functional code easy.
- Ad-hoc polymorphism through typeclasses (called `interface`s in Medaka). (Similar
  to `trait`s if you're coming from Rust.)
- Backends that support native compilation through LLVM and edge/in-browser compilation
  through WebAssembly.
- A powerful effects system for tracking a program's side effects and capabilities.
- Dev tooling and ergonomics designed to make working in the language easy.

Here's a small sample:

```mdk
data Expense =
  | Coffee Float
  | Rent Float
  | Book String Float

cost : Expense -> Float
cost (Coffee c) = c
cost (Rent r)   = r
cost (Book _ p) = p

main =
  let expenses = [Coffee 4.50, Rent 1200.0, Book "SICP" 35.0]
  let total = expenses |> map cost |> sum
  println "You logged \{length expenses} expenses."
  println "Total spent: $\{total}"
```

## Why Medaka?

I spent a lot of time in college working in Haskell, a wonderful language that gave
me a deep appreciation for functional programming. Since then I've been working in
industry, mostly with more "practical" (though in my experience much less elegant)
languages like Typescript. I miss Haskell's elegance, but there are many elements
of it that make it a hard sell for projects where _what_ you're delivering is much
more important than _how_ you got there. Part of this goes to Haskell's nature as
both a general purpose programming language and a research language that is
always looking to push the boundaries of what a functional language can be. OCaml
fixes some of these issues with practicality, but it also lacks some of my favorite
features from Haskell, like typeclasses and the beautiful declarative syntax. The
truth is that both of these languages are getting a bit old, and while they have
more than contributed their share to the world of functional programming, there are undoubtedly
some decisions they made early in their lives that they would change given what we
know today.

Medaka seeks to be a pragmatic, modern language that builds on the groundwork laid
by these functional forebears. Medaka is oriented much more towards **getting things
done** than being a research project. Medaka is strongly biased in favor of simplicity
over complexity in its feature set, choosing to forgo some of the more esoteric
functional programming features in favor of a cohesive and comprehensible set of
core features. The goal is to take the best pieces from languages like Haskell and
OCaml (with some additional inspiration from languages like Rust, Elm, and F#) and
package them up in a sleek, modern shell that enables programmers to become productive
in Medaka very quickly.
